---
title: Ruby, Gem, Bundler
date: 2025-09-09
categories: [dev, ruby]
tags: [ruby, gem, bundler]
---


### What are Ruby, Gem, Bundler?

Think of the Ruby world as three stacked Lego bricks:

- Ruby itself – the language runtime (the “engine”).
- Gem – Ruby’s single-library package manager (one brick at a time).
- Bundler – the project-level multi-library resolver (the whole Lego set for one project).

Below is the long-form tour.

#### Ruby

An interpreted, object-oriented scripting language (like Python, Perl, Lua).
Ships with a small standard library (File, Net::HTTP, JSON, etc.).
Anything not in the standard library has to be installed separately → enter “gems”.

#### Gem

A gem is a plain `*.gem` file: code + metadata (name, version, author, dependencies).  
`gem install` rails downloads the rails gem and its dependencies.
- To install into the user local directory(`~/.local/share/gem/ruby/3.4.0/gems`), use `gem install`.
- To install into the system wide direcotry(`/usr/lib/ruby/gems/3.4.0/gems`), use `gem --no-user-install install bundler`.

**NOTE**: You can check environment variables related to Gem by `gem env`.


#### Bundler (bundle, bundler)

Bundler is itself a gem (can be installed by `gem install bundler`).  
It adds a project layer: every project gets its own Gemfile that declares exact gems + versions it needs.  
Running `bundle install`:  
– computes a full dependency graph,
– writes the exact snapshot to Gemfile.lock,
– downloads missing gems,
– can optionally keep them inside the project (vendor/bundle) or in a shared path by `bundle config set --local path 'vendor/bundle'`

---

### Typical workflow

1. Install ruby & bundler
```bash
ruby -v                    # make sure Ruby is installed
gem install bundler        # one-time global install
```
2. Edit Gemfile

```bash
bundle init                # creates an empty Gemfile
```
`bundle init` will create an empty `Gemfile`.

```Gemfile
source 'https://rubygems.org'
gem 'jekyll', '~> 4.3'
gem 'rake',   '~> 13.0'
```

3. Install Gems

```bash
bundle install             # resolves & installs
```
`bundle install` will resolve depedencies and create gems.  

Locked gems will be written in `Gemfile.lock`.  

4. Run with locked gems

```bash
bundle exec jekyll serve   # run with locked gems
```

