title: P, NP, NP-hard, NP-complete: Complete explanation
date: 2025-06-09
categories: [dev, algorithm]
tags: [algorithm, p, np, np-hard, np-complete]

---

### ✅ P problems

In computational complexity theory, the class of problems that have polynomial-time algorithms using a deterministic Turing machine is called P problems.

---

### ✅ NP problems

An NP problem refers to a problem for which, given a solution, one can verify whether it is correct in polynomial time.  
All P problems are also included in the set of NP problems.

---

### ✅ Reduction

Before we get into NP-hard problems, let's study what **_reduction_** is.  
When we compare the **difficulty** of two problems, we use the concept of **_reduction_**.  
Let's say there are two problems: `A` and `B`.  
Suppose inputs to problem `B` can be reduced(transformed) into equivalent inputs to problem `A` and transformation time is negligible.  
If we use the fastest solution to solve problem `A`, we can say that fastest solution of problem `B` is faster than problem `A`.  
Therefore, we can define:  
> If problem `B` can be reduced to problem `A`, problem `A` is harder than problem `B`.

Coming back to our story...
The SAT problem is the task of finding a combination of truth values for N Boolean variables that makes a given logical formula true.
Any NP problems can be reduced to SAT problem meaning that SAT problem is at least as hard as any problem in NP.

---

### ✅ NP-Hard problems

A problem is NP-hard if **every problem in NP can be reduced to it** in polynomial time.' 
NP-Hard problems are at least as hard as the hardest problems in NP.  
Noone has ever yet solved NP-Hard problems in polynomial time, so they are strongly believed to be unsolvable in polynomial time.(They are _literally_ hard.)  
However, NP-Hard problems are not required to be in NP themselves, so their solution might not be verified in polynomial time.

---

### ✅ NP-Complete problems
NP-complete problems are the hardest problems in the class NP (nondeterministic polynomial time).
A problem is NP-complete if it satisfies two conditions:
1. It's in NP:
This means if someone gives you a solution, you can verify it in polynomial time.
2. It's NP-hard:
This means every other problem in NP can be reduced to it in polynomial time.

---

### 🎓 Interesting Facts

In the year 2000, the Clay Mathematics Institute announced 7 of the most important and difficult open problems in mathematics. These are called the Millennium Prize Problems. For each problem, there’s a $1 million prize for a correct solution.
One of the 7 problems include **P vs NP problems**.

The key question is:
> If a problem can be verified quickly (in polynomial time), can it also be solved quickly (in polynomial time)?

No one has ever found a polynomial-time algorithm for an NP-complete problem (like SAT or 3-SAT).
Over decades, people have tried and failed to find such algorithms.
Some problems feel inherently hard, even though checking a solution is easy.
So most computer scientists and mathematicians believe:
> P ≠ NP, but no proof yet exists.

---

### Reference
[1] Cook-Levin's Theorem

